##### GigaTech-writer-challenge

# The 21st Century Cures Act and FHIR

The 21st Century Cures Act (Cures Act) was passed by Congress in 2016 and after proposed rules were questioned and commented on, the [final rules](https://www.healthit.gov/curesrule/) were published in 2020.  The Cures Act’s primary focus was to reduce Information Blocking and increase Patient Access to Electronic Health Information (EHI).  The focus of this summary will be Information Blocking and how the HL7® Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR®) supports the new initiatives.

### What is FHIR?
First off, we’ll explore FHIR - what it is and general uses.  According to [HL7.org](https://hl7.org/fhir/), `FHIR is a standard for health care data exchange`.  From a developer standpoint, FHIR acts as a data exchange API with specific endpoints designed to make accessing and interpreting data on a national level much easier.  It also sets a standardized format for data entry and utilizes commonly agreed upon data classifications in order to ensure uniformity across data.  One of the many benefits of having a more nationally available data exchange for health information is doctors being able to see patient health history from anywhere in the country and being able to make the best diagnosis/recommendations based on data instead of relying on patient-provided information or the delays of record sharing via fax or email. 

### Connecting the Cures Act and FHIR
As mentioned above, the Cures Act seeks to reduce, if not eliminate, information blocking by providers and/or payors.  One of the ways the Cures Act is trying to accomplish this is by introducing more standards for EHI and data entry.  The Cures Act includes new API certification criterion and specifically looks to the current FHIR standards as the industry benchmark.  Multiple questions and comments to the proposed rules sought to utilize current FHIR standards because they were already in use by health IT companies and are considered a strong, consensus-based set of standards and the government agrees that the HL7 FHIR standards are the ultimate goal.  With this acknowledgement and the overall goal of the Cures Act, FHIR increasingly becoming the gold standard amongst health IT developers. The increased reliance and use of FHIR resources by the government is indicative of what health IT companies should begin focusing time and resources on in order to stay competitive in a saturated market.

### Additional Cures Act Implications
An additional side effect of the Cures Act is how it will affect patient access to their EHI.  The Cures Act looks to health IT developers to create new APIs for patient use that would allow them to access their own EHI when they see fit.  One benefit of this setup would be in the event a patient has moved providers, the new provider is not setup with access to FHIR resources, but the patient would be able to access their own information and provide the records to the new providers without their previous provider being a “middle-man” in the process of record transfer.  An additional benefit would be if a patient were simply travelling across the country and required emergency care and that facility needed their prior history and medications.  In this case a patient could provide that information quickly and easily.  Ideally, a major medical institution would be setup to view FHIR resources in the event a patient was incapacitated and unable to provide the relevant information.

The Cures Act also starts to apply more pressure on Providers and Payors to be more transparent with EHI.  The more information providers and payors have to provide, in a wholly secure environment and within the regulations, as there are noted exceptions, the better oversight can be provided to lessen or reduce healthcare costs.  It could also be a means to better track and try to fight the opioid pandemic in the United States by tracking prescription usage and associated details.

### Summary
In summary, the Cures Act makes a large effort, and takes an even larger step forward, in combating information blocking practices in health care, provides new, stricter standards aligned with the current HL7 FHIR standards for health IT data entry, and creates new resources for patient access to EHI.  The HL7 FHIR standards were a significant innovation at their time of inception, and they have continued to grow and become a more reliable set of standards to be used and adopted by new health IT professionals going forward.
